Measurement Science
and Technology

You may also like

PAPER

Research on online anomaly detection methods
for bearing degradation
To cite this article: Shuowei Jin et al 2024 Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 085003

View the article online for updates and enhancements.

- Quantum support vector data description
for anomaly detection
Hyeondo Oh and Daniel K Park
- Boundary sample extraction support vector
data description: a novel anomaly
detection method for large-scale data
Xiaofei Wang, Yongzhan Chen, Fenglei
Xu et al.
- Abnormal data detection for industrial
processes using adversarial autoencoders
support vector data description
Kepeng Qiu, Weihong Song and Peng
Wang

This content was downloaded from IP address 210.125.183.6 on 26/05/2026 at 00:49

Measurement Science and Technology
Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003 (12pp)

https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6501/ad4621

Research on online anomaly detection
methods for bearing degradation
Shuowei Jin1, Hongchao Xu1, Zhenlin Lu2,∗, Aiyun Yan1, Yuhang Zhao1 and Huan He1
1

College of Information Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, People’s
Republic of China
2
Beijing Institute of Microelectronics Technology, Beijing 100076, People’s Republic of China
E-mail: 2362894439@qq.com
Received 19 March 2024, revised 13 April 2024
Accepted for publication 1 May 2024
Published 8 May 2024
Abstract

In industrial applications, rolling bearings operate under conditions of high precision and high
speed, and their physical and mechanical characteristics change with the increase in operating
time. Traditional diagnostic methods struggle to adapt well to the changing characteristics of
bearings for online anomaly detection. Therefore, this research proposes an online anomaly
detection method for rolling bearings based on time-density-weighted incremental support
vector data description (TISVDD). A classification strategy is proposed to prevent samples
misclassification in the updating process. The Detection Boundary is established based on
SVDD decision boundary to enhance the recognition of abnormal samples in the process of
model updating. A dual-screening mechanism update strategy for support vectors is proposed. It
involves establishing a preliminary screening mechanism based on the Elimination Boundary.
On this basis, an in-depth screening mechanism based on time density weight is introduced by
considering spatiotemporal characteristics of samples, enhancing the real-time performance of
online anomaly detection for bearings. Building upon the fused dual-boundary SVDD, a
TISVDD framework for online anomaly detection is proposed, enabling the detection model to
dynamically update in response to data changes over time. To validate the effectiveness of the
proposed method, experiments were conducted using the XJTU-SY bearing dataset and
real-time datasets collected on an online hardware platform. The results demonstrate the
effectiveness and superiority of the method in practical applications.
Keywords: anomaly detection, dual-screening, rolling bearing, SVDD, online update

1. Introduction

online to follow the changes in bearing performance for realtime and accurate judgment of the bearing’s status. Hence, the
research significance of online bearing anomaly detection is
significant.
Currently, online anomaly detection for bearings mainly
focuses on the vibration signals of the bearings. Research
methods are mainly divided into those based on physical
characteristics and data-driven methods [3, 4]. In physical
characteristics-based methods, the study primarily involves
researching online bearing anomaly detection through mathematical modeling and signal processing based on the inherent characteristics of bearings. Jiang and Zhang [5] proposes a method for bearing vibration modeling and online
fault size estimation, achieving model-based online fault

Bearings, as common components in the industrial field, are
also crucial parts of rotating machinery. About 44% of machine failures in the industrial field are related to bearing faults
[1]. Therefore, research on bearing anomaly detection is essential. However, the performance of bearings is not constant
throughout the entire industrial operation process [2]. With the
accumulation of operating time, the performance of bearings
gradually degrades. The original model will no longer adapt
to the changes in new data, and the model needs to be updated
∗

Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.

1

© 2024 IOP Publishing Ltd

All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

detection and diagnosis. Wang et al [6] introduces an online
speed-independent order tracking method, enabling online
fault diagnosis of bearings under variable speeds. Liang et al
[7] suggests a combined method of maximum correlation kurtosis deconvolution and band-pass filtering, enabling online
detection of early weak structural damage in inter-shaft bearings of aircraft engines. Sharma et al [8] proposes establishing a sensitive sub-band selection criterion based on empirical wavelet transform of vibration signals, enabling online
fault detection for constant and variable speed bearings. In
data-driven methods, most current research on online anomaly
detection tends to favor neural networks. Mao et al [9] proposes a rule-adaptive neural network architecture, constructing a deep multi-task single-class anomaly detection model.
Mao et al [10] suggests constructing a deep dual-time domain
adaptation model based on transfer learning, achieving early
online fault detection of bearings through offline learning
of degraded bearing sequences and online processing. Zhou
et al [11] introduces a time-varying online transfer learning model for intelligent fault diagnosis of rolling bearings,
achieving intelligent bearing fault diagnosis with incomplete
and unlabeled target data. Liu et al [12] proposes integrating domain-adaptive deep stacked denoising autoencoder networks into an online early fault detection framework based
on granularity feature prediction, achieving effective feature
extraction for online bearing fault data. In the above methods,
physically-based approaches generally require prior knowledge of bearings, making it challenging to address the complex variations and unknown fault modes in online bearing
anomaly detection. Due to the difficulty in collecting sufficient bearing data in real scenarios, the data in the feature
space tends to be imbalanced and unevenly distributed [13,
14]. As a result, in data-driven approaches, methods leaning
towards neural networks are prone to overfitting as a result.
Additionally, neural network methods rely heavily on a large
number of samples and have high computational complexity, making it challenging to improve the real-time performance of online bearing anomaly detection in resource-limited
situations.
Support vector data description (SVDD) [15], as another
data-driven anomaly detection method, requires fewer samples
compared to neural networks and can still perform reliably
in anomaly detection with a limited number of samples.
Additionally, it has a relatively lower computational complexity, making it easier to train and implement in environments with limited resources. However, traditional SVDD,
when used for anomaly detection, remains unchanged once the
model is trained. Since the performance of bearings degrades
over long-term operation, the SVDD hypersphere model used
for anomaly detection needs to follow the dynamic changes in
bearing performance. Therefore, incremental SVDD (ISVDD)
is more suitable for online bearing anomaly detection. The
standard ISVDD [16] updates the model with all new samples
each time, although it can demonstrate good performance, it
incurs a significant time cost, resulting in a substantial reduction in model update speed. KISVDD [17] and NISVDD [18]
train with new samples beyond the original model range and
old samples near the decision boundary of the original model.

KISVDD selects old samples for updating based on their
distribution, while NISVDD selects old samples for updating based on the distribution of new samples. Both methods
reduce the number of samples involved in the update to some
extent, reducing computation and improving update speed.
However, because they only observe the distribution of new
or old samples within the original model range, their models
exhibit lower robustness. Additionally, the boundary between
categorizing samples outside the original model range as either
abnormal or degenerated normal samples is unclear, leading
to lower accuracy in anomaly detection. HISVDD [19] integrates the accumulated fewer new samples, enhanced through
data augmentation, with the old samples near the original
model’s decision boundary for joint training. This approach
enhances the robustness of the model. However, in situations
with high sampling frequency, the introduction of data augmentation leads to a decrease in the model’s updating speed.
Additionally, the anomaly detection rate is relatively low, similar to the methods mentioned above.
Based on the above analysis, three key challenges in
ISVDD-based bearing online anomaly detection can be highlighted.
(1) The model faces challenges in defining abnormal samples
during the updating process, making it prone to samples
misclassification, resulting in false alarms and false positives, ultimately leading to a lower bearing anomaly detection rate.
(2) While maintaining high robustness, the model faces difficulties in improving update speed, as it requires a large
number of samples for comprehensive training, resulting
in lower real-time capabilities for bearing online anomaly
detection.
(3) The model struggles with stable online updates, failing to
adapt to the real changes in bearing data, resulting in the
difficulty of robust online anomaly detection for bearings.
In response to the above three challenges, through careful
analysis, we can draw the following three conclusions:
(1) When bearings degrade in performance, there are normal
samples nearby and abnormal samples farther away from
the original model. Therefore, the separation of normal
and abnormal samples is crucial for improving the bearing anomaly detection rate.
(2) During the updating process, a large number of samples
participate in the update training, leading to a decrease in
update speed. Therefore, selecting fewer suitable samples
for updates is crucial for improving the real-time performance of bearing online anomaly detection.
(3) The model cannot adapt to the changes in online real bearing data, with a large number of mixed normal and abnormal samples participating in training updates. Therefore,
establishing an online update scheme that removes abnormal samples and selects appropriate normal samples is
crucial for stable online bearing anomaly detection.
2

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

Based on the above analysis, this research proposes an
online adaptive updating SVDD anomaly detection method.
The main contributions of this research are as follows:

during the model’s online updating. Additionally, a dualscreening mechanism update strategy for SVs is introduced.
It establishes the elimination boundary, conducts preliminary
screening on samples that may become new support vectors
(nSVs), and then further screening through a time-densityweighted update strategy. This reduces the number of samples
involved in updates under higher robustness, thereby improving the speed of model updates. Finally, the TISVDD framework for online anomaly detection is proposed. Built on the
foundation of a fused dual-boundary SVDD, the samples are
then given time density weights for screening. This allows the
model to dynamically update in the time dimension, achieving
robust online anomaly detection for bearings.

(1) A classification strategy is proposed to prevent samples
misclassification in the updating process. The Detection
Boundary is established based on SVDD decision boundary to improve the model’s identification of abnormal
samples and to improve the accuracy of bearing online
abnormal detection.
(2) A dual-screening mechanism update strategy for support
vector is proposed. It involves establishing a preliminary
screening mechanism based on the Elimination Boundary.
On this basis, an in-depth screening mechanism based
on time density weight is established combining with the
spatiotemporal characteristics of samples. This approach
aims to enhance the model’s update speed, consequently
improving the real-time capability of bearing online anomaly detection.
(3) A time-density-weighted ISVDD (TISVDD) framework
for online anomaly detection is proposed. Based on the
fused dual-boundary SVDD, the samples are then given
time density weights for screening, so that the model is
dynamically updated in time dimension with data changes
to achieve robust online anomaly detection of bearings.

2.1. ISVDD introduction

SVDD aims to identify the SVs of target samples in multidimensional space to provide the optimal data description,
thereby constructing the minimum hypersphere, thus improving classification performance. Assuming there exists a dataset X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }, in which N denotes the count of target
data points. The problem is described as follows:
min R2 + C

n
∑

ξi

i =1

s.t.| |Φ (xi ) − c| |2 ⩽ R2 + ξ i , ∀i

The rest of this research is organized as follows: section 2
introduces the necessity of model updates based on ISVDD,
and a classification strategy to prevent misclassification of
samples during the updating process, a dual-screening mechanism update strategy for support vectors (SVs), and an online
anomaly detection framework based on TISVDD are proposed. Section 3 includes a comparative experiment with
other methods and presents the experimental results. Lastly,
section 4 provides a comprehensive conclusion for the entire
research.

(1)

where ξ i ⩾ 0 (i = 0, 1, . . . , n), R is the radius of the hypersphere, C is a penalty factor, and ξ i is the relaxation
factor. Φ (xi ) represents the nonlinear mapping function of the
sample xi in the high-dimensional feature space. The volume
of the hypersphere is minimized by minimizing R2 . To solve
the above optimization problem, constructing the Lagrangian
function allows the transformation of the optimization problem into the following dual problem:

2. Proposed method

min

The online anomaly detection model based on ISVDD does
not consider the delineation between anomalous samples and
degraded normal samples during model updates, leading to
a decrease in anomaly detection accuracy. Simultaneously,
the involvement of a large number of new or old samples in
updating the model results in a decrease in the model update
speed, thereby reducing the real-time capability of bearing
online anomaly detection. The existence of these issues can
make bearing online anomaly detection challenging to achieve
robustly.
In this section, to improve the discrimination accuracy of
new samples and simultaneously enhance the speed of model
updates for robust online anomaly detection of bearings, this
research, starting from the necessity of ISVDD, first proposes
a classification strategy to prevent samples misclassification
during the updating process. By establishing the Detection
Boundary, it can effectively discriminate anomalous samples

s.t.

n
∑

αi (Φ (xi ) · Φ (xj )) −

i =1
n
∑

n ∑
n
∑

αi αj (Φ (xi ) · Φ (xj ))

i =1 j =1

αi = 1, 0 ⩽ αi ⩽ 1

(2)

i =1

where αi ⩾ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier. Solving this optimization problem yields:
ci =

n
∑

αi Φ (xi )

(3)

i =1

R2 = | |Φ (xsv ) − ci | |2
= (Φ (xsv ) · Φ (xsv )) − 2

n
∑

αi (Φ (xi ) · Φ (xsv ))

i =1

+

n ∑
n
∑
i =1 j =1

3

αi αj (Φ (xi ) · Φ (xj )) .

(4)

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

For an unknown sample z, the distance from z to c is:
d2 = ||Φ (z) − ci ||2
= (Φ (z) · Φ (z)) − 2

n
∑

αi (Φ (xi ) · Φ (z))

i =1

+

n ∑
n
∑

αi αj (Φ (xi ) · Φ (xj )) .

(5)

i =1 j =1

If d2 ⩽ R2 , then z is within the hypersphere and belongs to
the normal samples.
For the ISVDD algorithm, new samples enter the classifier
in batches over time for online anomaly detection. When αi
achieves the optimal solution, the observed the sample xi satisfies the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions:
αi = 0 ⇒ d2 < R2
0 < α i < C ⇒ d2 = R2 .
αi = C ⇒ d2 > R2

Figure 1. Schematic of the detection boundary.

(6)
The establishment of the Detection Boundary outside the
hypersphere decision boundary aims to resolve the determination of anomalous samples during the model updating process.
By setting an appropriate detection threshold and establishing a suitable Detection Boundary, the objective is to ensure
that degraded normal samples during the model updating process fall within the Detection Boundary, while anomalous
samples fall outside the detection boundary. Setting the detection threshold:

Samples xi that satisfy 0 < αi < C are SVs, thereby constructing the hypersphere decision boundary. For newly added
samples, if they meet the KKT condition d2 < R2 , then the
SVs remains unchanged, and the model does not need to
be updated. However, if there are samples among the newly
observed samples that violate the KKT conditions (SVKs), the
previously computed Lagrange multiplier αi will no longer
satisfy the new model. In this case, the model needs to be
updated to meet the requirements of online anomaly detection for bearings [20]. Regarding model updates, the discrimination of online anomalous samples and the improvement of
model update speed are important research directions in online
anomaly detection.

λ=

R
, 0<λ⩽1
Rλ

(7)

where Rλ is the radius of the detection boundary. The minimum value of Rλ cannot be less than R. If it is less than R, it
may misclassify normal samples violating the KKT conditions
as anomalous samples. When equal to R, the detection boundary coincides with the decision boundary, and at this point, Rλ
is minimized, equivalent to the offline SVDD anomaly detection model. The choice of the detection threshold determines
the model’s tolerance to anomalous samples in online anomaly
detection. A lower detection threshold leads to a larger detection boundary relative to the decision boundary, resulting in a
higher misclassification rate of anomalous samples. Through
statistics, it is observed that during the actual operation of
bearings, anomalous samples are generally located outside
the boundary at twice the radius from the center of the bearing’s hypersphere. Therefore, setting the detection boundary
threshold λ to 0.5 and considering this boundary as the detection boundary will enhance the accuracy of anomaly detection.
The establishment of the detection boundary will address
the challenge of misclassifying anomalous samples during the
updating process. It will enable the model to achieve precise
identification of anomalous samples during the updating process, thereby improving the accuracy of online bearing anomaly detection.

2.2. A classification strategy to prevent samples
misclassification during the updating process

In the context of the ISVDD method, for the discrimination of online anomalous samples, if there are SVKs in the
observed samples, typically all SVKs participate in model
updates. Subsequently, the updated model is used to perform
online anomaly detection on the new samples from the current test set. However, in practice, there may be anomalous
samples within SVKs. If all SVKs are included in model
updates, anomalous samples may also become SVs, causing
potential misclassification of samples during the updating process. Consequently, this can lead to a reduction in the adaptability of the updated model, so that the accuracy of bearing
online anomaly detection decreases.
Addressing the challenge of misclassification of anomalous
samples in the online bearing anomaly detection mentioned
above, we propose a classification strategy to prevent samples
misclassification during the updating process, based on the
design concept of the dual-boundary SVDD [21] for handling
misclassified samples. Detection boundaries are established
outside the hypersphere decision boundary, as illustrated in
figure 1.

4

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

The establishment of the Elimination Boundary aims to
conduct a preliminary screening for the participating nSVs in
the update. Due to the degradation of bearing performance,
under normal circumstances, samples on the SVDD model
tend to diverge towards the surroundings. There may also be a
slight overall offset towards the sides. Therefore, the samples
becoming SVs for the next model do not necessarily all come
from SVKs; they may also come from the original model’s
SVs and samples near the decision boundary inside. The establishment of the Elimination Boundary is used to retain samples
near the decision boundary, providing fewer suitable nSVs for
the model’s update. By setting a suitable elimination threshold,
an appropriate elimination boundary is established, leading to
the elimination of all new and old samples falling within the
elimination boundary. Setting the elimination threshold:

Figure 2. Illustration of elimination boundary.

2.3. A dual-screening mechanism update strategy for
support vector

β=

The problem of misclassification of samples during the
model updating process has been resolved. However, the
improvement of model update speed remains a key research
focus in current online anomaly detection.

Rβ
, 0<β<1
R

(8)

where Rβ is the radius of the elimination boundary. When Rβ
is minimum zero, it means that no elimination is carried out,
and when Rβ is maximum R, it means that all the old and new
samples within the decision boundary of the previous model
are eliminated, and only SVKs are retained. Failure to eliminate samples will lead to an increasing number of samples
participating in the update training. Eliminating all new and
old samples within the decision boundary will result in no old
samples participating in the update training. Therefore, the
minimum value of Rβ should be greater than zero, and the
maximum should be less than R. The selection of the elimination threshold determines the model’s punishment level for
samples within the decision boundary of the online anomaly
detection model. The higher the elimination threshold, the larger the elimination boundary relative to the decision boundary, resulting in more elimination of new and old samples,
and consequently, fewer participating nSVs in the update. In
the actual operation process of bearings, newly added samples
generally disperse uniformly outward along the sphere center
as the bearing performance degrades. However, considering
the possibility of overall deviation, combined with the statistical results of multiple experiments, the elimination threshold
β is set to 0.54 as the most suitable. By setting the current
boundary as the elimination boundary, it is possible to significantly reduce the number of samples participating in the
update while maintaining the robustness of the model update
process.

2.3.1. Preliminary screening mechanism based on the
Elimination Boundary.
To enhance the speed of model

updates, a new challenge arises in the sample selection during
the model updating process for ISVDD. For online anomaly
detection, the selection of samples participating in updates can
be categorized into three types: using all old samples, using all
new samples, and using a combination of new and old samples
[22]. Using only old samples cannot capture the degradation
trend of bearing equipment, making the model unable to adapt
to new samples. SVDD is sensitive to noise, and using only
new samples may lead to significant bias in the new model
due to incidental reasons such as sensor acquisition errors
and environmental interference [23]. Using only old samples
and using only new samples both fail to adapt to the characteristics of model updates over the entire lifespan of bearing
equipment, and using synthetic samples combining new and
old data can effectively address this challenge. However, if all
new and old samples are used to train SVDD, as the number
of updates increases during the degradation of bearing equipment performance, the number of samples involved in training
will also increase, leading to a progressively higher computational complexity. This makes it impossible to achieve timely
monitoring of bearing status.
To address the challenge of improving model update speed,
a dual-screening mechanism update strategy for supporting
vectors is proposed. The first step involves a preliminary
screening of samples within the hypersphere. Similar to the
principle of establishing the detection boundary, the elimination boundary is established within the hypersphere decision
boundary, as shown in figure 2. The black dashed line represents the original model decision boundary, the red solid line
represents the elimination boundary, and on the left, new and
old samples are added to the hypersphere original model, while
on the right, the elimination boundary eliminates new and old
samples added to the original model.

2.3.2. In-depth screening mechanism based on time density
weight. The second step of the dual-screening mechanism

update strategy is to propose a screening mechanism based on
time density weight on the basis of the preliminary screening
at the elimination boundary. It performs in-depth screening on
the remaining nSVs to involve fewer samples in the update,
further enhancing the real-time capability of online anomaly
detection in bearings.
In the process of model updating, new and old samples participate in the update training together, but their contributions
to the model are different. The model at the current moment
5

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

should be established based on the samples collected at the
current moment to achieve anomaly detection at the current
moment. Online anomaly detection for bearings is aimed at
detecting anomalies at each moment during the entire lifecycle
of the bearing’s operation, so new samples are crucial for the
establishment of a new model. In comparison, old samples
only provide a past reference for the new model, allowing
the new model to avoid significant deviations caused by noise
interference. As the number of updates increases, the contribution of old samples to the new model will gradually decrease.
Therefore, the time decay weight function is proposed for the
sample xi :
Wi (t) = e−αt , α > 0

Figure 3. Details of samples distribution with time density weights.

(9)

where t is the time step, Wi (t) represents the time decay weight
of the ith sample at time t. α is the decay coefficient, and by
adjusting α, the decrease rate of the time decay weight can be
flexibly controlled. The value of α can be empirically determined through multiple experiments. New samples are assigned
the highest time decay weights, while old samples are assigned
relatively lower time decay weights. With the increase in the
number of updates, the time decay weight of each sample
decreases sequentially. The concept of time decay weights
for samples is relative between new and old samples. When
new samples are input in the next time step, the previous new
samples become old samples for the next time step. Therefore,
the time decay weight of a sample itself only decreases sequentially, approaching zero gradually, but never reaching zero.
The lower the time decay weight of a sample, the earlier it participated in model updating training, the more times it participated in updates, the smaller its contribution to the new model,
and the less likely it is to become the SVs.
The time decay weights of samples provides temporal relative weights, but for the selection of nSVs, the temporal weights
of samples cannot ignore the spatial density information. In the
SVDD model updating process, the influence between samples
is continuous, and this influence is not only temporal but also
spatial, where neighboring samples will inevitably affect the
sample at that point in space. Therefore, based on the time
decay weight, the idea of K-nearest neighbors (KNN) can be
borrowed [24], proposing the time density weight function for
each the sample xi :
k
∑

WTDi =

The time density weight function considers the spatial relationship between samples on the basis of time decay weights,
fully reflecting the evolution and correlation of samples in
both time and space. The lower the time density weight of a
sample, the lower the temporal decay weight in its vicinity.
In spatial terms, this is manifested by higher isolation in time
decay weights, such as newer samples with higher isolation
or samples with time decay weights similar to their neighbors. Consequently, the likelihood of becoming SVs for that
sample is lower. Higher isolation in time decay weights in
space implies a higher probability of being affected by noise
interference, resulting in a lower likelihood of becoming SVs
naturally.
The detailed distribution chart of time density weights for
samples is shown in figure 3. Taking the first model update
as an example, the time decay weights for old samples is
Wi (1) = e−α , and for new samples, the time decay weights are
Wi (0) = 1.Therefore, the time density weight for the sample
xj is WTDj = e−α , for the sample xm is WTDm = e−α , for the
−α
sample xk is WTDk = 2e 3 +1 , and for the sample xn is WTDn =
1, with WTDj = WTDm < WTDk < WTDn .The sample xn has the
highest time density weight, making it the most likely to
become SVs. The sample xj and xm have equal and lowest
time density weights, making them the least likely to become
SVs after this round of updates and are likely to be eliminated.
In particular, the sample xj , compared to the sample xk , is a
new sample with the highest isolation in time decay weight in
space, making it the most likely to be affected by noise and
should be excluded from becoming SVs. It should be eliminated in this round of in-depth screening mechanism.
By eliminating a batch of samples with the lowest time
density weights and making the remaining samples participate
in the updating training, the in-depth screening after the preliminary screening of nSVs will be realized, and the samples
participating in the updating will be further reduced.
The proposal of the dual-screening mechanism update
strategy involves layer-by-layer screening of nSVs, effectively
reducing the number of samples involved in the update while
maintaining model robustness. This results in a significant
reduction in computational workload, thereby enhancing the
speed of model updates and improving the real-time capability of online bearing anomaly detection.

Wi (t)

i =1

k

(10)

where Wi (t) is the time decay weight of the sample xi , k is the
number of nearest neighbors for the sample xi , and the value
of k can be determined through multiple experiments based on
experience. The time density weight function calculates the
average of the time decay weights of the k nearest samples to
the sample xi , excluding the sample xi itself. This ensures that
the sample focuses more on the influence of nearby samples
on itself, avoiding noise interference that may cause some
samples to deviate from the overall impact, thereby ensuring
the robustness of the model.
6

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

and removing abnormal samples during updates. Layered
screening of nSVs significantly reduces the number of samples
involved in updates, achieving an effective improvement in
update speed and enhancing the accuracy and real-time performance of online bearing anomaly detection.

2.4. Online bearing anomaly detection framework based on
time density weight

During the whole life cycle of bearings, various factors such
as harsh working environment, external interference and performance degradation may lead to abnormal vibration signals
collected, so the monitoring of vibration data is of great significance for the online abnormal detection of bearings [25].The
health stage of a bearing constitutes 80%–90% of its entire
lifespan [2, 26]. During the health stage, the vibration data generally exhibits a long-term, small, and stable fluctuation trend.
Subsequently, it enters a short-term degradation stage, where
the amplitude of the bearing vibration data gradually increases.
Finally, it reaches an extremely short failure stage, marked by
a sudden and significant increase in the amplitude of vibration
data. Entering this stage signifies reaching the end of the operational lifespan, indicating that the bearing is no longer operational. During the entire lifespan of the bearing, the vibration data fluctuates around zero, with both positive and negative amplitudes roughly balanced. Additionally, a small amount
of anomalous data is generated throughout the entire lifespan
stage.
Based on the characteristics of the vibration data throughout the entire lifespan of the bearing and to meet the
requirement of improving real-time performance under limited resources, we propose a TISVDD online anomaly detection framework. This framework integrates the detection
boundary and elimination boundary into a dual-boundary
SVDD model. Subsequently, samples are assigned time density weights for screening, allowing the model to dynamically
update with the changing data in the time dimension. This
approach aims to achieve robust online anomaly detection for
bearings.
The vibration signals of the bearing are continuously
acquired online as a batch to form the online degradation dataset. The initial set of samples is used to train the dual-boundary
SVDD model to make it complete. New samples are then introduced to determine if they satisfy the KKT conditions. If all
new samples satisfy the KKT conditions, the model does not
undergo an update, and the evaluation is deferred until the next
batch of samples arrives. In case there are new samples violating the KKT conditions, the detection boundary is employed
to identify abnormal samples among them. The remaining new
samples are combined with the old samples from the previous
stage. Preliminary screening of nSVs is carried out using the
Elimination Boundary. Time density weights are assigned to
samples, and in-depth screening of nSVs is performed based
on these weights. Finally, the updated dual-boundary SVDD
model is constructed using the remaining nSVs. This process is
repeated until the bearing enters the fault stage, at which point
the model ceases to update, and the bearing becomes inoperative. The overall framework of TISVDD for online anomaly
detection is illustrated in figure 4, and the algorithmic flowchart of TISVDD is shown in figure 5.
The proposal of the TISVDD online anomaly detection
framework based on bearings starts from the characteristics
of bearing vibration data. This allows the model to closely
follow data changes for stable updates, effectively defining

3. Simulation
3.1. Data setting

To verify the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed
method in this experiment, we utilize the publicly available
XJTU-SY Bearing Datasets to validate the first two innovations. This dataset is gathered from the bearing acceleration
degradation test platform of Xi’an Jiaotong University’s joint
laboratory. It aims to demonstrate the enhancement in anomaly detection accuracy during the model update process, as
proposed in the first innovation, and to confirm the improvement in model update speed during the process, as proposed in
the second innovation. Subsequently, the validity of the online
anomaly detection of the TISVDD model, proposed as the
third innovation, is verified using a real-time dataset collected
on the online hardware platform. The online hardware platform can real-time capture bearing vibration data and perform
online detection, as illustrated in figure 6.
The XJTU-SY bearing dataset has a sampling frequency of
25.6 kHz, recording 32 768 samples of lateral and longitudinal
vibration data in each sampling. This experiment studied the
vibration data of three different bearings under conditions of
2100 RPM speed, 35 Hz frequency, and 12 kN load, ranging
from normal to failure states. Experimental verification shows
that training the SVDD model with 500 samples makes the
model complete. Therefore, the degradation dataset for each
file includes the first 500 samples for subsequent experiments,
as shown in table 1.
3.2. Validation of TISVDD classification strategy

In this section, the effectiveness of the classification strategy
proposed in this research to prevent misclassification of
samples during the updating process is verified. It aims to
demonstrate the improvement in online anomaly detection
accuracy compared to traditional methods and current mainstream methods. Three metrics are selected for evaluation:
average accuracy (AA), and F-score. Recall (TPR) is the score
for true positives (TP), specificity (TNR) is the score for
true negatives (TN), and precision (TPP) provides a balance
between TP and FP accuracy. F-score is a highly suitable
method for evaluating the accuracy of anomaly detection in
imbalanced datasets. Its value is the harmonic mean of TPR
and TPP, and it becomes significant only when both TPR and
TPP are high. The formula is as follows:
TP
TP + FN
TN
TNR =
TN + FP
TPR =

7

(11)
(12)

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

Figure 4. Overall framework of TISVDD online anomaly detection based on bearings.

TP
TP + FP
2 ∗ TPR ∗ TPP
F − score =
.
TPR + TPP
TPP =

To visually illustrate the adaptability of the TISVDD
algorithm in online anomaly detection to different sample
quantities during the update process, we conducted a
comparative bar chart of the classification accuracy of the
proposed TISVDD with the current mainstream algorithm
HISVDD and the traditional incremental algorithm standard
ISVDD across varying numbers of incremental samples. The
results are shown in figure 7.
From figure 7, it is visually evident that TISVDD, proposed in this research, exhibits lower classification accuracy
in online anomaly detection when there are fewer samples,
indicating that the model is not yet complete. Similar to the
other two methods, with too few samples, the differences in
features between anomaly and normal samples are not as distinct, making the model prone to false positives or missing positives. As the number of added samples increases, the model
gradually becomes complete, and the classification accuracy
of TISVDD stabilizes above 96%, significantly higher than
the other two methods. This suggests a notable online anomaly detection performance, demonstrating good adaptability
to varying sample quantities. Therefore, table 2 and figure 7
together validate the outstanding online anomaly detection

(13)
(14)

The TISVDD algorithm proposed in this research is
compared with standard ISVDD, KISVDD, NISVDD, and
HISVDD algorithms on three bearing datasets for online
anomaly detection accuracy using the average F-score evaluation metric. The results are shown in table 2.
According to table 2, the TISVDD algorithm proposed
in this research has the highest F-score on all three bearing datasets compared to other methods. This indicates that
the performance of TISVDD in terms of online anomaly
detection accuracy is the best. It is evident that the classification strategy of the TISVDD algorithm accurately distinguishes between abnormal samples and degraded normal
samples in SVKs, effectively identifying abnormal samples
during the update process. Moreover, it achieves an improvement in online anomaly detection accuracy compared to other
algorithms.

8

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

Table 2. F-score on data sets.

Bearing data set ISVDD KISVDD NISVDD HISVDD TISVDD
Bearing 1_1
Bearing 1_4
Bearing 1_5

86.55
87.36
85.96

90.25
92.33
91.28

94.26
93.58
93.85

94.46
92.68
93.57

97.81
97.58
96.38

Figure 5. Algorithm flowchart of TISVDD.
Figure 7. Classification accuracy of TISVDD.

3.3. Validation of TISVDD update strategy

To demonstrate the TISVDD algorithm’s ability to maintain
good robustness during model updates and its improvement
in update speed, we conducted a comparison with several
mainstream algorithms. We refer to the model trained on the
newly added dataset at each moment as the true model at that
moment, the model trained by standard ISVDD. The TISVDD
algorithm proposed in this research and the models updated by
other mainstream algorithms serve as predictive models. The
similarity between the predictive models and the true models is used as the metric for comparing our method with other
algorithms. During the model update process, only the hypersphere center c, hypersphere radius R, and support vectors SVs
may undergo changes. Since c and R can be obtained from
SVs, this allows us to calculate the Spearman correlation coefficient of SVs between the predictive models generated by our
algorithm and other algorithms and the true models, serving
as a measure of similarity.
In the online update algorithm, the SVs of the true model
serve as the dataset rSVs, and the SVs of the predicted model
serve as the dataset pSVs. Assuming that the data lengths of
rSVs and pSVs are both n, where any element value i in the
set is represented as ri, pi (1 ⩽ i ⩽ n), perform simultaneous
ascending or descending sorting on all elements in the data
rSVs and pSVs. This results in newly sorted sets RSVs and
PSVs, where the element Ri is the ith element in RSVs, and Pi
is the ith element in PSVs. Subtract the corresponding position

Figure 6. Online hardware platform.
Table 1. Degradation data set of bearings in different failure states.

Bearing dataset
Bearing 1_1
Bearing 1_4
Bearing 1_5

Number
of files Fault element
123
122
52

Outer race
Cage
Inner and outer race

Number of
samples per file
500
500
500

capabilities of TISVDD and its improvement in online anomaly detection accuracy compared to other online anomaly
detection methods.
9

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

Table 3. The data sets used in the algorithm accuracy tests.

Average update time (s)
Bearing dataset ISVDD KISVDD NISVDD HISVDD TISVDD
Bearing 1_1
Bearing 1_4
Bearing 1_5

algorithms.

elements in the sets RSVs and PSVs to obtain a rank difference
set D, where di = ri − pi, di ∈ D, 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n. With m being the
number of updates in the degradation stage, the formula for
calculating the Spearman rank correlation coefficient between
the support vectors rSVs and pSVs for the jth update is as
follows:
n
∑

ρj = 1 −

i =1

.

ρ=

(15)

ρj

j =1

m

.

1.24
1.21
1.15

0.82
0.79
0.72

For validating the effectiveness of the TISVDD algorithm in
model updating proposed in this research, we utilized an online
hardware platform to collect real-time bearing vibration data.
The process diagram of updating the model using the TISVDD
algorithm is presented in MATLAB, as shown in figure 9.
From figure 9, the entire process of TISVDD algorithm
updating the model can be intuitively observed. In figure 9(b),
compared to figure 9(a), the dual-boundary SVDD is used
for training, and the elimination boundary screens the old
samples of the original model. The number of samples is
reduced by 61.6%, but the model hardly changes. It can be
seen that the establishment of the elimination boundary of the
dual-boundary SVDD allows the model to maintain robustness
while significantly reducing the number of samples, effectively reducing computation. Additionally, in figure 9(d), a
depth filtering mechanism based on time density weight is
applied on top of figure 9(c) to train the model for complete updates, reducing the number of samples by 41.5%.
For the entire process of TISVDD algorithm updating the
model, considering the participation of both new and old
samples in updates results in a reduction of 71.8% in samples,
while considering either new or old samples alone reduces
the samples by 43.6%, achieving a significant reduction in
samples and a substantial decrease in computation, thereby
enhancing update speed. From figures 9(a) to (d), the TISVDD
algorithm stably updates the original model to the new model

The average Spearman rank correlation coefficient
throughout the entire lifespan update process is calculated
as follows:
m
∑

1.44
1.38
1.31

3.4. Validation of TISVDD model updating

d2i

n (n2 − 1)

1.54
1.62
1.49

the model gradually becomes complete. The correlation coefficient of the TISVDD algorithm’s updated model stabilizes
above 0.96, demonstrating that the update strategy of the
TISVDD algorithm is well-adapted to model updates caused
by the degradation of bearing performance. It can adapt to
changes in Incremental samples and exhibits good robustness.
Additionally, from table 3, it can be seen that the TISVDD
algorithm has lower average update times for individual models significantly across the three bearing datasets compared to
other algorithms. This confirms that the TISVDD algorithm
effectively reduces computational workload and improves
update speed. Considering figure 8 and table 3 together,
it can be concluded that the TISVDD algorithm maintains
model robustness during the update process while achieving
an improvement in model update speed, enhancing the realtime capability of bearing online anomaly detection.

Figure 8. Average spearman correlation coefficients for different

6

25.18
22.35
20.16

(16)

The TISVDD algorithm proposed in this research, along
with the standard ISVDD, KISVDD, NISVDD, and HISVDD
algorithms, undergo online updates on the aforementioned
bearing degradation datasets. The average Spearman rank correlation coefficients are shown in figure 8, and the average
update time for individual models is presented in table 3.
From figure 8, it can be seen that the TISVDD algorithm,
proposed in this research, exhibits the highest average
Spearman rank correlation coefficient during the model updating process across all ranges of Incremental samples. This
indicates that the model updated by the TISVDD algorithm
has the highest similarity with the true model. In cases with
fewer samples, the correlation coefficient is lower because the
model is not complete. As the number of samples increases,

10

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

Figure 9. TISVDD model updates: (a) SVDD training; (b) dual-boundary SVDD training; (c) preliminary screening; (d) in-depth screening.

following the data changes, fully demonstrating the effectiveness of TISVDD algorithm in updating online anomaly detection models and achieving robust online anomaly detection for
bearings.

Boundary, significantly enhance the model’s ability to identify
abnormal samples during the update process, prevent misclassification of abnormal samples, highlighting the uniqueness of our method. Secondly, we propose a dual-screening
mechanism update strategy for SVs. After preliminary screening of new and old samples that may become SVs based on
the establishment of the Elimination Boundary, an in-depth
screening is performed on the remaining samples based on
time density weight, thereby greatly reducing the number of
samples involved in the update, effectively reducing the computational load, and enhancing the real-time performance of
bearing online anomaly detection. This demonstrates the novelty of our method. Finally, we propose an ISVDD online
anomaly detection framework based on time density weight,
merging the detection boundary and elimination boundary
into a dual-boundary SVDD model. Subsequently, samples
are assigned time density weight for screening, allowing the
model to dynamically update with changes in bearing vibration data in the time dimension, achieving robust online anomaly detection for bearings. In conclusion, the proposed method
is not only theoretically innovative but also exhibits significant

4. Conclusion
This manuscript proposes an online anomaly detection model,
TISVDD, designed for the online operational scenarios of
bearings. The model innovatively achieves online anomaly
detection for bearings. TISVDD is designed to improve the
accuracy and update speed of online anomaly detection for
bearing operational data in current ISVDD methods. Thorough
validation is conducted using the XJTU-SY bearing dataset
and real-time data collected from an online hardware platform. We confirm the rationality and effectiveness of the proposed method and obtain a series of valuable conclusions,
providing important insights for future research. Firstly, we
introduce a classification strategy to prevent samples misclassification during the update process, establish the Detection
11

Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2024) 085003

S Jin et al

novelty in practical applications. It provides profound insights
for further research in the field of online anomaly detection for
bearings.
However, this method still has some shortcomings. For
example, the updating strategy proposed in this paper still
requires retaining a large number of samples for training
updates. If too many samples are reduced through this method,
the model after updating training will differ significantly from
the model trained using all samples. In the future, it may be
beneficial to optimize this updating strategy to involve fewer
samples in the update training process, greatly improving the
update speed. This would enable more real-time online anomaly detection when deployed on resource-limited embedded
devices.

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

Data availability statement
All data that support the findings of this study are include
within the article (and any supplementary files).

[14]

Acknowledgments

[15]
[16]

This work was supported by Independent Research and
Development Program of CASC (Grant No.YJ2345CX).

[17]

ORCID iD
Hongchao Xu  https://orcid.org/0009-0007-9537-7968

[18]

References

[19]

[1] Ahang M, Jalayer M, Shojaeinasab A, Ogunfowora O,
Charter T and Najjaran H 2022 Synthesizing rolling bearing
fault samples in new conditions: a framework based on a
modified CGAN Sensors 22 5413
[2] Jiang L, Sheng H, Yang T, Tang H, Li X and Gao L 2023 A
new strategy for bearing health assessment with a dynamic
interval prediction model Sensors 23 7696
[3] Wang Q, Liu X, Wei B and Chen W 2021 Online incipient fault
detection method based on improved ℓ1 trend filtering and
support vector data description IEEE Access 9 30043–59
[4] Xu X, Tao Z, Ming W, An Q and Chen M 2020 Intelligent
monitoring and diagnostics using a novel integrated model
based on deep learning and multi-sensor feature fusion
Measurement 165 108086
[5] Jiang J and Zhang B 2012 Rolling element bearing vibration
modeling with applications to health monitoring J. Vib.
Control 18 1768–76
[6] Wang Y, Xu G, Luo A, Liang L and Jiang K 2016 An online
tacholess order tracking technique based on generalized
demodulation for rolling bearing fault detection J. Sound
Vib. 367 233–49
[7] Liang Z, Wang A, Yu Y and Yang P 2021 Research on early
weak structural damage detection of aeroengine intershaft
bearing based on acoustic emission technology Struct.
Health Monit. 20 3113–22
[8] Sharma V, Raghuwanshi K N and Jain K A 2021 Sensitive
sub-band selection criteria for empirical wavelet transform

[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]

12

to detect bearing fault based on vibration signals J. Vib.
Eng. Technol. 9 1–15
Mao W, Shi H, Wang G and Liang X 2022 Unsupervised deep
multitask anomaly detection with robust alarm strategy for
online evaluation of bearing early fault occurrence IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 71 1–13
Mao W, Sun B and Wang L 2021 A new deep dual temporal
domain adaptation method for online detection of bearings
early fault Entropy 23 162
Zhou Y, Dong Y and Tang G 2023 Time-varying online
transfer learning for intelligent bearing fault diagnosis with
incomplete unlabeled target data IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.
19 7733–41
Liu K, Mao W, Shi H and Liang X 2021 A new unsupervised
online early fault detection framework of rolling bearings
based on granular feature forecasting IEEE Access
9 159684–98
Li S, Peng Y and Bin G 2023 Prediction of wind turbine
blades icing based on CJBM with imbalanced data IEEE
Sens. J. 23 19726–36
Li S, Peng Y, Shen Y, Zhao S, Shao H, Bin G, Guo Y, Yang X
and Fan C 2024 Rolling bearing fault diagnosis under data
imbalance and variable speed based on adaptive clustering
weighted oversampling Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 244 109938
Tax D M and Duin R P 2004 Support vector data description
Mach. Learn. 54 45–66
Hua X and Ding S 2011 Incremental learning algorithm for
support vector data description J. Softw. 6 1166–73
Yin G, Zhang Y-T, Li Z-N, Ren G-Q and Fan H-B 2014
Online fault diagnosis method based on incremental support
vector data description and extreme learning machine
with incremental output structure Neurocomputing
128 224–31
Zhang L, Qiao F, Wang J and Zhai X 2021 Equipment health
assessment based on improved incremental support vector
data description IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 51 3205–16
Lin Z, Duan D and Yang Q 2020 One-class classifier based
fault detection in distribution systems with varying
penetration levels of distributed energy resources IEEE
Access 8 130023–35
Gyamfi E and Jurcut A D 2023 Novel online network intrusion
detection system for industrial IoT based on OI-SVDD and
AS-ELM IEEE Internet Things J. 10 3827–39
Fei C, Zhenlin L, Shuowei J, Xin L and Yu Z 2022 A relaxed
support vector data description algorithm based fault
detection in distribution systems Front. Energy Res.
10 973794
Zhang L, Huang J, Wei Y, Liu J, Dong A and Jianwei W 2023
Open set maize seed variety classification using
hyperspectral imaging coupled with a dual deep
SVDD-based incremental learning framework Expert Syst.
Appl. 234 121043
Zhong G, Xiao Y, Liu B, Zhao L and Kong X 2022 Pinball
loss support vector data description for outlier detection
Appl. Intell. 52 16940–61
Mniai A, Tarik M and Jebari K 2023 A novel framework for
credit card fraud detection IEEE Access 11 112776–86
Fan C, Peng Y, Shen Y, Guo Y, Zhao S, Zhou J and Li S 2024
Variable scale multilayer perceptron for helicopter
transmission system vibration data abnormity beyond
efficient recovery Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 133 108184
Lei Y, Li N and Guo L, Li N, Yan T and Lin J 2018 Machinery
health prognostics: a systematic review from data
acquisition to RUL prediction Mech. Syst. Signal Process.
104 799–834

